In the previous lecture, we looked at the
tooltip velocity for a two-joint robot. The
end-effector pose is described by the end-effector
coordinates x and y, and we came up with expressions
for the rate of change of the end-effector
pose. That is the rate of change of x and
the rate of change of y in terms of the rate
of change of the robot joint angles. We did
a similar thing for the three-joint robot
where the end-effector pose is described by
a coordinate x and y, and an orientation angle,
theta. And, we again described x-dot, y-dot
and theta-dot in terms of the rate of change
of the robot’s joint angles.
Now, we want to do the same thing for a six-axis
robot like this Puma 560 robot. We found out
that it is very, very difficult to do. The
necessary differential calculus and algebra
is going to take up pages and pages and pages
in my notebook. It is a very difficult thing
to do. So, we are going to look at an alternative
way to crack this problem.
So, what we want do now is to understand the
relationship between the velocity of the joints
of this multi-jointed robot and the velocity
of the end-effector, which we described in
terms of its rate of change of its x, y and
z coordinates and rate of change of its orientation.
If we look at just a single joint, which
is the approach we are going to use here,
we can see that as I adjust just the first
joint of the robot, we can see that the end-effector
moves in an arc. And so, as I adjust joint
one by a small amount, we see that the x and
y coordinates of the end-effector change.
Now, if I adjust the second joint by a small
amount, we can see that the end-effector changes
in the vertical or z direction and its orientation
also changes slightly. We can follow exactly
the same argument for the third joint of the
robot, fourth joint of the robot and so on.
In your first calculus class, you would have
come across this relationship. We can approximate
the derivative of a function by taking a finite
difference. In this case, we perturb the value
of x by a small amount, delta x. And, as delta
x gets smaller and smaller in the limit as
it approaches zero, we have the true derivative.
What we are going to do is to compute an approximate
derivative of the forward kinematic function.
Now, we have introduced previously the forward
kinematics as a function K and function of
the joint angles and it returns the end-effector
pose. And, you will notice here that I have
used the partial derivative notation because
the kinematic function is a function of a
vector Q. And, we are going to consider the
partial derivative with respect to one particular
joint angle. So, what we are trying to do
is to come up with an approximation for the
way in which the forward kinematics changes
as a function of variation of a single joint
angle.
For the six-axis robot, we are going to treat
the joints individually and we are going to
start with joint number one. So, the first
thing that we are interested in is, if I adjust
joint number one, what effect does that have
on the translational and angular velocity
of the end-effector? In the animation on the
right hand side, we can see the end-effector
pose changing as we make small adjustments
to the first joint angle. That is Q1.
Let us look at how this works for the Puma
560 robot. The first thing I am going to do
is to load a model of the Puma 560 robot and
we need to decide what joint angle configuration
the robot is going to be in. You will notice
in the workspace that there are a number of
variables like Qn, Qr, Qs and Qz and these
are just different robot poses.
The one we are going to use is Qn. That is
short hand for Q nominal. This is a pose of
the Puma robot that is somewhat in the middle
of its workspace and where it is very dexterous.
It is able to move nicely in many different
directions.
Now, we are going to do is to compute the
forward kinematics at that particular pose
and we use the fkine method to do that. And,
here is the end-effector pose expressed as
a homogeneous transformation matrix. Now,
what I am going to do is to compute the end-effector
pose when I slightly disturb the joint angles.
So, it is going to be about the pose Qn. What
I am going to do is to add a vector to that
and the first element in the vector is a small
displacement.
Now, I am going to displace joint one. So,
I am going to add zero to the rest of the
robot’s joints. What we have now is the
end-effector pose for a very small change
in the angle of joint number one. We have
disturbed joint one by 0.01 radians. And
here, we can see that the end-effector pose
is slightly different.
If we summarised the results that we have
just obtained in MATLAB for the nominal joint
angle given here by the vector Q, this is
the robot’s end-effector pose expressed
as a 4 x 4 homogenous transformation matrix.
We adjusted Q by a very small amount. We adjusted
it by 0.01 radians, which is around half
a degree. When we did that, we obtained a
slightly different value for the robot’s
end-effector pose. We can see that the numbers
in those two matrices are not exactly the
same and that is, of course, what we expect
because we have changed one of the joint angles.
The challenge now is to understand how this
change is related to the change in the joint
angle.
We are now going to use the expression we
introduced a moment ago which relates the
derivada de uma função para uma diferença finita
em uma função. Se eu calcular essa diferença finita
Eu obtenho esta matriz resultante aqui. E a pergunta
é, claro, o que isto realmente significa?
Se eu escrever a expressão simbólica para uma
Matriz de transformação linear, que lembramos tem
um componente rotacional 3 x 3 e um
componente de translação 3 x 1, e se eu pegar a
derivada daquela matriz com relação a variável de
articulação Q1, eu posso escrever esta expressão
Aqui.
Agora, podemos combinar os componentes nesta expressão
simbólica com as componentes na expressão
numérica. Então, esta é a expressão - uma
derivada parcial de T com relação a Q1 e
este pedaço aqui é a derivada parcial
da matriz de rotação com relação a Q1.
Vamos considerar primeiro a parte translacional
Aqui é a derivada parcial da posição do
efetuador do robô em relação a Q1.
E, se eu multiplicar pela taxa de variação
de Q1 em relação ao tempo, acabo com
a taxa de variação da translação em relação
ao tempo, que é, de fato a velocidade de translação
do efetuador. Isso é x ponto, y ponto e z ponto
que eu posso também escrever às vezes
como Vx, V you Vz. Eu posso rearranjar esta expressão
e temos uma expressão para a velocidade do efetuador
em termos de um vetor constante multiplicado
pela velocidade da articulação 1.
Você notou que há um sinal de aproximação
aqui. É importante lembrar
que calculamos uma diferença finita aqui.
É uma aproximação para a derivada verdadeira.
Usamos uma variação no ângulo da junta de 0,01 radianos.
E, conforme fazemos essa variação no ângulo da junta
cada vez menor, obtemos uma melhor
aproximação para derivada verdadeira. Mas,
se o tornar muito pequeno, encontraremos erros
numéricos por causa da forma aritmética.
é feita dentro de um computador digital e precisamos
encontrar algum tipo de equilíbrio. Portanto, tenha em
mente que fizemos aqui é uma aproximação
do relacionamento verdadeiro
Relacionamos a velocidade de translação do
efetuador à taxa de variação de Q1 e podemos
fazer isto para a articulação dois e articulação três
até a articulação seis. Encontre as expressões
que relacionam a velocidade da articulação
à velocidade de translação do efetuador.
Agora vamos considerar a parte rotacional.
E, isto não é tão simples. Aqui,
escrevi a derivada parcial de uma matriz de
rotação com relação ao ângulo da articulação
um. E, se eu multiplicar isso pela taxa de
variação da articulação um em relação ao tempo,
acabo com a taxa de variação da matriz de rotação
em relação ao tempo. Há uma bem conhecida
relação entre a taxa de variação da
matriz de rotação, a velocidade angular
ômega e a própria matriz de rotação. E,
podemos substituir isso aqui. A matriz
S é que chamamos de matriz simétrica de
inclinação e é uma função do vetor de velocidade
angular ômega.